Principal component analysis (PCA) is a mainstay of modern data analysis -a black box that is widely used but (sometimes) poorly understood. The goal of this paper is to dispel the magic behind this black box. This manuscript focuses on building a solid intuition for how and why principal component analysis works. This manuscript crystallizes this knowledge by deriving from simple intuitions, the mathematics behind PCA. This tutorial does not shy away from explaining the ideas informally, nor does it shy away from the mathematics. The hope is that by addressing both aspects, readers of all levels will be able to gain a better understanding of PCA as well as the when, the how and the why of applying this technique.[2]

Large datasets are increasingly common and are often difficult to interpret. Principal component analysis (PCA) is a technique for reducing the dimensionality of such datasets, increasing interpretability but at the same time minimizing information loss. It does so by creating new uncorrelated variables that successively maximize variance. Finding such new variables, the principal components, reduces to solving an eigenvalue/eigenvector problem, and the new variables are defined by the dataset at hand, not a priori, hence making PCA an adaptive data analysis technique. It is adaptive in another sense too, since variants of the technique have been developed that are tailored to various different data types and structures. This article will begin by introducing the basic ideas of PCA, discussing what it can and cannot do. It will then describe some variants of PCA and their application.[1]

